---
title: Privileges
description: What privileges means in the system point of view.
icon: i-lucide-check-circle
---

The IAM service, allowed privileges are `demo`, `restricted`, `protected` `full` and `custom`. When a new token is [created](/docs/iam/essentials/api/creation), with a specified privilege, the token is scoped in the database level to that privilege. Any verification attempts with a privilege other then the one specified, will fail.

That means the IAM doesn't have any business knowledge, or an 'idea' what each level means to your client or app. Because of this design, and because every app has its own needs, the IAM gives you a flexible *Core* to ensure that the token it assigned to a user, will not escalate to a privilege its not created with, and vice versa.


This lets you structure, features, plans, RBAC, and more, to a specific user (or even plan), reliably. 


::caution
Never let users directly control their privilege if critical business logic in your app depends on that field.
::

---

You can control the privilege for each token in 3 processes:

- When [creating a token](/docs/iam/essentials/api/creation)
- Directly updating the field with `updatePrivileges` or the `POST /api/manage/privilege-update`{lang="http"} endpoint.
- Using the `privateActionManager` to make additional verification before updating. The endpoint uses this function, instead of `updatePrivileges`

::note
Follow the [Creating Tokens](/docs/iam/essentials/api/creation) docs to create a token first before directly updating privileges. 
::


## Updating Privileges

### Using the library

To update a privilege *directly*, you call `updatePrivileges`. This function searches for hashed token in the database, the user id, and updates the privilege:


```ts [example.ts]
import { updatePrivileges } from '@riavzon/auth'

const userId = 1234
const newPriv = 'full'
const token = 'token' // can be hashed or raw.

const results = await updatePrivileges(userId, token, newPriv)

```

On success you get back an object with:

```ts
{
 ok: true,
 date: new Date().toISOString(),
 data: { msg: 'Privileges updated successfully' }
}
```
On error:

```ts
 ok: false,
 date: new Date().toISOString(),
 reason: 'the reason of the failure'
```
If an database error happens the `reason` would be `'Internal server error'` if the token didn't found `'Token not found or unauthorized'`.

#### Signature 
```ts
export async function updatePrivileges(
    userId: number,
    rawToken: string,
    newPrivileges: 'demo' | 'restricted' | 'protected' | 'full' | 'custom',
): Promise<Results<{ msg: string }>>
```
#### Parameters

| Field | Type | Description |
|---|---|---|
| `userId` | `number` | The user id |
| `rawToken` | `string` | The token that the updates applies to. can be hashed or *Raw*  |
| `newPrivileges` | `'demo' \| 'restricted' \| 'protected' \| 'full' \| 'custom'` | The privilege to update. |


::warning
This action should be performed by a fully authenticated client.
::

::caution
Aside from searching for the hashed token in the database and the user id, the token is not verified with the [verification process](/docs/iam/essentials/api/verification). And its not behind any authentication.
::

#### With the `privateActionManager`


```ts
    const updatePrivilegesResults = 
     await privateActionManager(userId, TokenId, publicIdentifier, tokenName, {
        action: 'privilege-update',
        newPrivileges: newPrivilege
     });
```
The `privateActionManager` returns the response of `updatePrivileges` directly. Learn more at the [introduction page](/docs/iam/essentials/api/management#the-privateactionmanager).

---

### Using the route

Lets say you want to update a token privilege from `demo` to `restricted` in this example.

`POST /api/manage/privilege-update`{lang="http"} body:

```json
{
    "newPrivilege": "restricted",
    "tokenId": 2,
    "publicIdentifier": "pubkey",
    "name": "the token name"
}
```
On success you will get the following response: 

```http
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json; charset=utf-8

{
  "ok": true,
  "date": "current date",
  "data": { "msg": "Privileges updated successfully" }
}
```

Aside from the standard errors that related to authentication, rate limits, and provided bad data,

The response you get is the same one the the library users get above:

```http
HTTP/1.1 400
Content-Type: application/json; charset=utf-8

{
  "ok": false,
  "date": "current date",
  "reason": "reason from `privateActionManager`"
}
```

::note 
Check the [introduction page](/docs/iam/essentials/api/management#service) to see the standard error response.
::

#### Rate Limits

The endpoint also enforce rate limits controlled under the following configuration options:

- `rate_limiters.apiTokensLimiters.operationRateLimits.privilegeUpdate` - The main limiter for the privilege update endpoint. The default allows 5 creations in a window of 10 minutes and will trigger a block for 30 minutes if this limit is met. Consecutive triggers in this period will block the client permanently.

- `rate_limiters.apiTokensLimiters.generalUnionLimiter` - A `burstLimiter` and a `slowLimiter` [union limiter](https://github.com/animir/node-rate-limiter-flexible/wiki/RateLimiterUnion). Enforces no more than one request per second, and only 50 per minute. No Consecutive triggers in this limiter, triggering it again will result in a permanent ban. The limiter is *restarted* on successful updates.
   - `burstLimiter` - Will block the client for 15 minutes.
   - `slowLimiter` - Will block for 1 hour.


## Configuration Reference

### Rate limiters
| Limiter | Description |
|---|---|
| `rate_limiters.apiTokensLimiters.operationRateLimits.privilegeUpdate` | The main rate limiter for the privilege update endpoint |
| `rate_limiters.apiTokensLimiters.generalUnionLimiter` | General burst limiter |
